
> Piperazines
noun
1. A colorless crystalline compound, C4H10N2, used as a hardener for epoxy resins, an antihistamine, and an anthelmintic. A broad class of chemical compounds which mimic the effects of ecstasy. They were produced as a legal alternative to ecstasy (though have since been classified as Class C drugs) and have been found as a cutting agent in some ecstasy pills.
RELATED TERMS: THE GOOD STUFF, SMILEYS, SILVER BULLET, RAPTURE, PEP TWISTED, PEP STONED, PEP LOVE, PEP, PARTY PILLS, NEMESIS, LEGAL X, LEGAL E, HAPPY PILLS, FRENZY, FAST LANE, EXODUS, EUPHORIA, ESP, COSMIC KELLY, BZP, BOLTS EXTRA STRENGTH, BLAST, BENZYLPIPERAZINE, A2.

> LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide)
noun
1. A crystalline compound, C20H25N3O, derived from lysergic acid and used as a powerful hallucinogenic drug. Also called acid.
RELATED TERMS: WINDOW, TRIPS, TRIPPER, TAB, STARS, SMILIES, RAINBOWS, PAPER MUSHROOMS, MICRO DOT, LUCY, LIQUID ACID, LIGHTNING FLASH, L, HAWK, FLASH, DROP, DOTS, CHEER, BLOTTER, ACID.

> AH-7921
noun
1. a man-made (synthetic) opioid (an opium) or heroin like drug. Like all opioids it can reduce feelings of pain and can produce feelings of euphoria, relaxation and sleepiness.

> aMT
noun
1. A powerful hallicinogen with some simulant effects that can make you: Feel euphoric, upbeat and friendly to those around you, See illusions/distorted perceptions, Feel anxious and panicky 
RELATED TERMS: ?MT AND 2-(1H-INDOL-3-YL)-1-METHYL-ETHYLAMINE, INDOPAN, AMT FREEBASE, ALPHA-METHYLTRYPTAMINE.

> Magic mushrooms
A slang word for psilocybe semilanceata or ‘liberty cap’ mushrooms (the most common type of ‘magic mushroom’ in the UK) and any other mushroom which produces similar ’trippy’ effects, like hallucinations.
RELATED TERMS: SHROOMS, PHILOSOPHER'S STONE, MUSHIES, MAGICS, LIBERTY CAP, LIBERTIES, AMANI, AGARIC.

> Speed
The street name for the Class B drug amphetamine sulphate. Sometimes speed is used to refer to other types of amphetamines.  
Speed is a stimulant and people take ‘speed’ to keep them awake, energised and alert.
Other key effects and risks of taking speed are:
Feeling ‘up’,  excited and chatty.
People take it because it gives them the energy to do things for hours without getting tired, things like dancing, talking, and going out.
It can make people overactive, agitated or even acutely psychotic (this is a mental state when you see or hear things which aren't there and have delusions).
The high is generally followed by a long slow comedown, making you feel really irritable and depressed.
Speed puts a strain on your heart and can cause heart problems – some people have died from taking too much speed.
RELATED TERMS: WHIZZ, SULPH, PASTE, BILLY, BASE, AMPHETAMINE SULPHATE, AMPHETAMINE.

> Synthetic cannabinoids
Chemicals that are made to act like the active part of cannabis, a substance called tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). As synthetic cannabinoids act like cannabis the effects - good and bad - are likely to be very similar to cannabis. Some users will feel happy and relaxed, may get the giggles, feel hunger pangs and become very talkative. Others may feel ill or paranoid.
Synthetic cannabinoids are usually sold in 'herbal' smoking mixtures. Sometimes these smoking mixtures have been found not to contain any synthetic cannibinoids at all!
RELATED TERMS: X, TAI HIGH HAWAIIAN HAZE, SPICE, MARY JOY, EXODUS DAMNATION, ECSESS, DEVIL'S WEED, CLOCKWORK ORANGE, BOMBAY BLUE EXTREME, BLUE CHEESE, BLACK MAMBA, ANNIHILATION, AMSTERDAM GOLD.

> Steroids
Drugs that mimic certain natural hormones in the body that regulate and control how the body works and develops. There are two main groups of natural steroids - anabolic steroids and corticosteroids. It is the anabolic steroids that tend to be misused, mainly because they are similar to the male hormone testosterone and they can improve endurance and performance and stimulate muscle growth. 

Some people take the anabolic steroids to help build muscles or to try and look more ‘manly’. Other people take them to improve how they perform at sports, such as sprinting and cycling.

The key effects of anabolic steroids include:

They may help sports players train harder and longer.
If taken alongside a strenuous exercise regime, they may help with faster recovery times and with the building up of muscle mass.  
They can make some users feel paranoid, irritable, aggressive or even violent, and they can cause dramatic mood swings.
They can sometimes cause unwanted changes in appearance.
RELATED TERMS: ROIDS, JUICE.

> PCP 
was developed as an anaesthetic - a drug used in an operation and other procedures to temporally stop a patient from feeling pain. Doctors stopped using it because it can cause  hallucinations (seeing things that aren’t really there), make you feel really confused, and affect your mood.  

PCP can:

Make you feel numb and like they are not part of reality.
 

Cause changes to the way you see things. This might include seeing things that aren’t really there (hallucinations) and changes in how you experience time.
 
Change you’re mood in ways you don’t expect. It might make you feel really happy and upbeat but can also cause you to feel very down, panicky  and paranoid. You may believe things that aren’t true. Some people become more aggressive and violent.
When you take any drug you aren’t always in control of your own actions. People who have taken PCP have died from the injuries they have caused themselves and from hyperthermia (getting very hot). Clotting problems with your blood, muscle breakdown and kidney failure have also been reported.
 
Combining an anaesthetic drug like PCP with depressant drugs like alcohol is also dangerous.
RELATED TERMS: PHENCYCLIDINE, PEACE PILLS, HOG, ANGEL DUST.

> Synthetic cannabinoids
Chemicals that are made to act like the active part of cannabis, a substance called tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). As synthetic cannabinoids act like cannabis the effects - good and bad - are likely to be very similar to cannabis. Some users will feel happy and relaxed, may get the giggles, feel hunger pangs and become very talkative. Others may feel ill or paranoid.
 

Synthetic cannabinoids are usually sold in 'herbal' smoking mixtures. Sometimes these smoking mixtures have been found not to contain any synthetic cannibinoids at all!

There are lots of different types of synthetic cannabinoids and a large number have become Class B drugs, which are illegal to have, give away or sell. You can never be sure what is in a smoking mixture so it’s often hard to tell whether it is illegal or not.
RELATED TERMS: X, TAI HIGH HAWAIIAN HAZE, SPICE, MARY JOY, EXODUS DAMNATION, ECSESS, DEVIL'S WEED, CLOCKWORK ORANGE, BOMBAY BLUE EXTREME, BLUE CHEESE, BLACK MAMBA, ANNIHILATION, AMSTERDAM GOLD.

> Dimethyltryptamine (DMT) 
A hallucinogenic drug, which means you’re likely to experience a distorted view of objects and reality and it can cause hallucinations. It’s effects are similar to LSD and magic mushrooms. As with LSD, some people refer to using DMT as ‘tripping’, which can be a good or bad experience.

The key effects and risks of DMT include:

A distorted view of objects and reality or actual hallucinations. These effects are normally pleasurable and can come on rapidly, can be very intense and may last for two hours.
Until you have taken DMT you can't tell how strong it is or how it's going to affect you. Once the ‘trip’ has started, you can’t stop it.
Intoxication with DMT can cause nausea and vomiting.
RELATED TERMS: DMT, DIMITRI, AYAHUASCA.

> Tobacco 
is found in cigarettes which you smoke.  It comes from the leaves of the tobacco plant and contains many different chemicals.

One of the chemicals is nicotine, which gives smokers their 'hit' but is also highly addictive. This means it can be hard to quit smoking even if you want to.

Regular smokers believe that smoking tobacco helps them to relax, to handle stress and to feel less hungry.

But smoking can make your clothes and breath smell and can affect your skin and hair.

It can also cause serious damage to your health – it’s a risk factor for emphysema, heart attacks, strokes and lung cancer. It's estimated that smoking tobacco contributes to 100,000 premature deaths in the UK every year.

RELATED TERMS: SMOKES, SHISHA, ROLLIES, HUBBLE BUBBLE, HOOKAH, FAGS, CIGGIES, BACCY.

> What are Methylphenidate and Methylphenidate Based Drugs?

Methylphenidate (which is probably better known as Ritalin) is a stimulant and is used to treat Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). The methylphenidate based drugs are also stimulant drugs, whose chemical structure is similar to the chemical structure of methylphenidate

Although these drugs differs in how strong they are, how quickly they start to work, and how long their effects last, they share the same kinds of stimulant effects and risks as methylphenidate, which include:
Feeling ‘up’, excited and chatty.
Feeling energised and able to do things for hours without getting tired, things like dancing, talking, and going out.
They can make people overactive, anxious, panicky, confused, agitated, paranoid or even acutely psychotic (this is a mental state when you see or hear things which aren't there and can have delusions), which can lead you to put your own safety at risk.
Most stimulants can put a strain on your heart and can cause heart problems, which can be fatal, especially if you have a pre-existing heart problem.
 
 

The methylphenidate based drug ethylphenidate has been sold under its own name and under brand names, such as Gogaine and Nopaine, as an alternative to cocaine 
RELATED TERMS: RITALIN, PROPYLPHENIDATE, POSH, NOPAINE, METHYLNAPHTHIDATE, GOGAINE, FAKE COCAINE, EVOKE, ETHYLPHENIDATE, CHING, BURST, BANSHEE DUST.

> What are ‘legal highs’?

‘Legal highs’ contain one or more chemical substances which produce similar effects to illegal drugs (like cocaine, cannabis and ecstasy).  These new substances are not yet controlled under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 and there is often not enough research about them to know about their potency, adverse effects from human consumption, or when used with other substances or alcohol.  
However, more and more ‘legal highs’ are being researched to see what their dangers are and to see whether they should be made illegal. In fact,  many substances  that have been found in substances sold as ‘legal highs’ have already been made illegal. 
 
'Legal highs' cannot be sold for human consumption so they are often sold as incense, salts or plant food to get round the law.  The packaging may describe a list of ingredients but you cannot be sure that this is what the product  will contain.  

Just the fact that a substance is sold as ‘legal’ doesn’t mean that it’s safe or legal.  You can’t really be sure of what’s in a ‘legal high’ that you’ve bought, or been given, or what effect it’s likely to have on you or your friends.  We know that many ‘legal highs’ are sold under brand names like ‘Clockwork Orange’, ‘Bliss’, ‘Mary Jane’  and have been directly linked to poisoning, emergency hospital admissions including in mental health services and, in some cases, deaths. 


The main effects of almost all ‘psychoactive’ drugs, including ‘legal highs’, can be described using three main categories:

stimulants
‘downers’ or sedatives
psychedelics or hallucinogens.
 
RELATED TERMS: PLANT FOOD, NPS, NEW PSYCHOACTIVE SUBSTANCES, MDAT, ERIC 3, DIMETHOCAINE, BATH SALTS.

> What is are benzofuran compounds?

Benzofuran compounds are stimulants like ecstasy and amphetamines (such as speed) which can cause:
 
Temporary feelings of love and affection for other people.
Feelings of anxiety or even panic attacks.
Paranoid and confused states.
A rise in body temperature which could lead to overheating.
Overdose and death.
 
Benzofuran compounds, such as 6-APB, 5-APB, 5-APDB and 6-APDB are relatively new drugs, so not a lot is known about their long term effects. As they act like ecstasy and amphetamines it is likely that the risks associated with their misuse will also be similar.


Illegal from 10th June 2014

Because of their recognised harms , the Government followed expert advice and banned these drugs, and controlled them as class B drugs. This means that is is illegal to have, sell, supply or give away these substances to friends. 
 

If the Police arrest you in possession of benzofuran compounds, they’ll always take some action. This could include a formal caution, arrest and prosecution. Having benzofuran compounds for your own use (called possession) could result in up to five years in prison and/or an unlimited fine. While selling or giving benzofuran compounds away for free, even to friends, (called supplying) could result in up to fourteen years in prison.
 
RELATED TERMS: WHITE PEARL, BENZO FURY, 6-APDB, 6-APB, 5-APDB, 5-APB.

> What are tranquilisers? There are two types of tranquillisers – ‘major’ (which are non-addictive antipsychotics) and ‘minor’ (which are relaxants that are addictive and liable to misuse).

Here we’re just talking about the ‘minor tranquillisers’. These tranquillisers can induce periods of calmness, relaxation and sleep and are used to treat anxiety and insomnia. They are prescription only medicines that can normally only be prescribed following a consultation with a doctor.

There are many different types of minor tranquillisers, but the most common are the group of drugs called benzodiazepines. These include Rohypnol, Valium (also called diazepam), temazepam and phenazepam (although this latter drug is sometimes found in street drugs, it is not prescribed by doctors in the UK).

The key effects of tranquillisers include:

Sedation –  depressing the nervous system and ‘slowing’ the brain and body down.
Relief of tension and anxiety – helping the user feel calm and relaxed.
Help with insomnia.
Dependence –  with some people getting very reliant on their use and finding if they stop that they get nasty withdrawal symptoms, including decreased concentration, tremors, nausea, vomiting, headaches, anxiety, panics and depression.
RELATED TERMS: VALLIES, RUGBY BALLS, ROOFIES, ROHYPNOL, NORRIES, MOGGIES, MAZZIES, JELLIES, EGGS, DOWNERS, BLUES, BENZOS.

> What is cannabis?
It’s the most widely-used illegal drug in Britain, although the numbers of people using it are falling.

Cannabis is naturally occurring - it is made from the cannabis plant.
The main active chemical in it is tetrahydrocannabinol (or THC for short).
THC is the ingredient in cannabis that can make you feel very chilled out, happy and relaxed.
THC can also make you hallucinate, meaning that it can alter your senses, so that you might see, hear or feel things in a different way to normal.
There are many myths about cannabis  - that it’s safe because it’s natural, that using cannabis will completely ruin your life, your health and your future or that using cannabis will lead you into using other, more dangerous drugs. What is true is that cannabis can havesome very real, harmful effects on your mind and body, as well as creating longer-term problems:

Cannabis effects how your brain works. It can make you feel very anxious and even paranoid, it can make it difficult for you to concentrate and learn, make your memory worse and make you feel less motivated.
Tobacco and cannabis share some of the same chemical 'nasties' and just like smoking tobacco, smoking cannabis has been linked to lung diseases like tuberculosis and lung cancer.

Using it has also been linked, in some people, to serious, long-term mental health problems.

A conviction for possessing cannabis could lead to a caution, a fine or even jail.
RELATED TERMS: WEED, SKUNK, SINSEMILLA, SENSI, RESIN, PUFF, POT, MARIJUANA, HERB, HASHISH, HASH, GRASS, GANJA, DRAW, DOPE, BUD, BHANG.

> What are N-Bomb?
N-Bombs (members of the NBOMe 'family' of drugs) are powerful hallucinogens, similar to LSD,which means it changes the way you see objects and reality. You might see or hear things which aren’t there (known as hallucinations). The experience of taking hallucinogens is often referred to as a ‘trip’. Trips can be good or bad, but until you take it you don’t know how it will affect you – and once you’re on a ‘trip’ you can't stop it.

The main effects and risks of taking hallucinogens, like N-Bomb, are:

Time and movement can appear to speed up and slow down.
Colour, sound and objects can get distorted and you can experience double vision.
These distortions of your senses can be quite unpredictable, sometimes pleasant, but sometimes very frightening (these are called 'bad trips').
N-Bomb's are also related to the 2C ‘family’ of compounds.

N-Bombs become Class A drugs
Because of their recognised harms, the Government followed expert advice and banned these drugs and controlled them as a Class A drugs, from 10th June 2014.

This means that if the police arrest you in possession of N-Bombs, they'll always take some action. This could include a formal caution, arrest and prosecution.

From 10th June 2014 having N-Bombs for your own use (called possession) could result in up to seven years in prison and/or an unlimited fine. Selling or giving N-Bombs away for free, even to friends, (called supplying) could result in serious jail time, between a minimum of eight years and a life sentence and/or an unlimited fine. 
RELATED TERMS: SMILEY PAPER, BOM-25, 2C-I-NBOME, 25I-NBOME, 25I.

> What is phenazepam? Phenazepam is a powerful benzodiazepine, which are drugs referred to as minor tranquillisers because they relieve tension and anxiety, and help the user feel calm and relaxed. Phenazepam has been reported as approximately five times stronger than Valium (another well known tranquilliser), so it is easy to take too much and overdose. Phenazepam is not used in the UK as a medicine, but it is used in

Russia to treat epilepsy and neurological disorders. Phenazepam was previously sold and marketed as a ‘legal high’ or as fake Valium.

The key effects and risks of phenazepam include:

A sedative effect, relieving tension and anxiety, and making the user feel calm and relaxed.
A loss of coordination, dizziness and drowsiness.
Phenazepam is a depressant so mixing it with other depressant drugs like heroin, other tranquillisers or alcohol, can lead to an accidental overdose and possibly death.
On 13 June 2012, Phenazepam was made a Class C drug, which means it is now illegal to have for yourself, give away or sell.
RELATED TERMS: FENAZEPAM, BONSAI SUPERSLEEP, BONSAI.

> What is mephedrone? 
Mephedrone (sometimes called ‘meow meow’) is a powerful stimulant and is part of a group of drugs that are closely related to the  amphetamines, like speed and ecstasy. There isn't much evidence about mephedrone and it's long term effects as it's quite a new drug but because it is similar to speed and ecstasy  the long term effects may well be similar. There have reports of people hospitalised due to the short-term effects. 

Also, you can never be entirely sure that what you’re buying is actually mephedrone and not something else.

The main effects and risks of mephedrone include:

Euphoria, alertness and feelings of affection towards the people  around you.
Feelings of anxiety and paranoia.
Mephedrone, or meow meow, can also overstimulate your heart and circulation; and can overstimulate your nervous system, with risk of fits.
There have been reports that more people are injecting mephedrone. Injecting any drug, or sharing injecting equipment, runs the risk of the person injecting catching or spreading a virus such hepatitis C or HIV. There is also the risk that veins may be damaged and that an abscess or a blood clot will develop, leading to further damage, such as gangrene.
RELATED TERMS: WHITE MAGIC, MIAOW, MEPH, MEOW MEOW, MC, M-SMACK, M-CAT, DRONE, CHARGE, BUBBLE, BOUNCE, 4-MMC.

> What is heroin? Heroin is a drug made from morphine, which is extracted from the opium poppy. Opium has been around for many hundreds of years and was originally used to treat pain, sleeplessness and diarrhoea. When morphine is made into heroin to be used as a medicine, it’s called diamorphine, and is stronger than morphine or opium. Like many drugs made from opium (called opiates), heroin is a very strong painkiller. ‘Street’ heroin sold as 'brown' is sometimes now used by clubbers as a chill out drug after a big night out.

It is still just the same street heroin but some people mistakenly think it's not as addictive.

Here are some of the main effects and risks of heroin:

A small dose of heroin gives the user a feeling of warmth and well-being, bigger doses can make you sleepy and very relaxed.
The first dose of heroin can bring about dizziness and vomiting.
Heroin is highly addictive and people can quickly get hooked.
Injecting heroin and sharing injecting equipment can  be very risky, as it runs the risk of the injector catching or spreading a virus, such as HIV or hepatitis C. There is also the risk that veins may be damaged and that an abscess or blood clot may develop.
RELATED TERMS: SMACK, SKAG, HORSE, H, GEAR, BROWN.

> What is ecstasy? 
Ecstasy (also known by its chemical name, MDMA) is often seen as the original designer drug because of its high profile links to dance music culture in the late 80s and early 90s. Clubbers took ecstasy to feel energised, happy, to stay awake and to dance for hours. The effects take about half an hour to kick in and tend to last between 3 to 6 hours, followed by a gradual comedown.

The main effects and risks of ecstasy include:

An energy buzz that makes people feel alert, alive, in tune with their surroundings, and with sounds and colours often experienced as more intense.
Users often develop temporary feelings of love and affection for the people they're with and for the strangers around them.
Short-term risks of ecstasy can include feeling anxious or getting panic attacks, and developing confused episodes, paranoia or even psychosis.
Some people have been known to take another ‘E’ when they haven't yet felt the expected ‘high’ of their first ‘E’. The danger then is that both Es kick in at once and you’ve got a double dose of effects to deal with.
A big problem with ecstasy is that it’s rarely pure. Sometimes, there is no MDMA at all. Sometimes, it contains other drugs, like PMA, which can be fatal. Regardless of what it looks like and what it is called, you can’t be sure what’s in a pill or a powder and you can’t predict how you’ll react.


RELATED TERMS: XTC, SUPERMAN, ROLEXS, PINK SUPERMAN, PILLS, MITSUBISHI'S, MDMA, MANDY, E, DOLPHINS, CRYSTAL, COWIES, BROWNIES.

> What is mephedrone? 
Mephedrone (sometimes called ‘meow meow’) is a powerful stimulant and is part of a group of drugs that are closely related to the  amphetamines, like speed and ecstasy. There isn't much evidence about mephedrone and it's long term effects as it's quite a new drug but because it is similar to speed and ecstasy  the long term effects may well be similar. There have reports of people hospitalised due to the short-term effects. 

Also, you can never be entirely sure that what you’re buying is actually mephedrone and not something else.

The main effects and risks of mephedrone include:

Euphoria, alertness and feelings of affection towards the people  around you.
Feelings of anxiety and paranoia.
Mephedrone, or meow meow, can also overstimulate your heart and circulation; and can overstimulate your nervous system, with risk of fits.
There have been reports that more people are injecting mephedrone. Injecting any drug, or sharing injecting equipment, runs the risk of the person injecting catching or spreading a virus such hepatitis C or HIV. There is also the risk that veins may be damaged and that an abscess or a blood clot will develop, leading to further damage, such as gangrene.
RELATED TERMS: WHITE MAGIC, MIAOW, MEPH, MEOW MEOW, MC, M-SMACK, M-CAT, DRONE, CHARGE, BUBBLE, BOUNCE, 4-MMC.

> What are cathinones? The chemical ‘cathinone’ is a naturally occurring stimulant drug found in the plant, Khat.

Cathinones are the family of related chemicals, including cathinone and many synthetically produced chemicals, like mephedrone, methylone (M1) and MDPV. Cathinones are ‘cousins’ of the amphetamine family of drugs,  which includes amphetamine itself (speed) and MDMA (ecstasy), and which have similar effects. Cathinones were sold online and in headshops as so called ‘legal highs’ until they became Class B drugs in April 2010.

Cathinones can cause feelings of euphoria and empathy as well as increasing alertness and talkativeness.  In a situation of only recently-emerging evidence on what are the exact effects and risks each of the different cathinones, it is accepted that they broadly have a balance of effects similar to amphetamines (speed) and to MDMA (ecstasy).
RELATED TERMS: PYROVALERONE, METHYLONE, MDPV, MAGIC CRYSTALS, M1, BUTYLONE.

> Cocaine - It can give a powerful high that can leave you feeling really down

Powder cocaine (also called coke), freebase and crack are all forms of cocaine. They’re all powerful stimulants, with short-lived effects – which means that they temporarily speed up the way your mind and body work, but the effects are short-lived. Both ‘freebase’ cocaine (powder cocaine that’s been prepared for smoking) and ‘crack’ cocaine (a ‘rock’ like form of cocaine) can be smoked. This means that they reach the brain very quickly, while snorted powder cocaine gets to the brain more slowly.

All types of cocaine are addictive, but by reaching the brain very quickly freebase or crack tend to have a much stronger effect and be more addictive than snorted powder cocaine. Injecting any form of cocaine will also reach the brain more quickly but this has serious additional risks, including damaging veins and spreading blood bourne virsues, such as HIV and Hep C.

Here are the main effects and risks of taking cocaine:

It can make you feel on top of the world, very confident, alert and awake, but some people can get over-confident, arrogant and aggressive and end up taking very careless risks.
It raises the body’s temperature, makes the heart beat faster and reduces your appetite.
When the effects start to wear off, people experience a long ‘comedown’, when they feel depressed and run down. This crash can happen for days afterwards.
RELATED TERMS: WHITE, WASH, TOOT, STONES, SNOW, ROCKS, PERCY, PEBBLES, FREEBASE, CRACK, COKE, CHING, CHARLIE, CHANG, C.

> What is nitrous oxide?
Nitrous oxide is a gas with several legitimate uses, but when inhaled it can make people feel euphoric and relaxed. This happy feeling has led to it being nicknamed ‘laughing gas’. Some people also experience hallucinations.

However, there is a risk of death as a lack of oxygen can occur when using nitrous oxide. This risk is likely to be greater if the gas is consumed in an enclosed space or if a substantial amount is rapidly used.

There are three main legitimate uses of nitrous oxide:

To numb pain during medical procedures such as dental work.
In engines to increase their power output.
In catering, in whipped cream aerosol cans to prevent the cream going ‘bad’and in food packaging to prevent the food from rotting.
RELATED TERMS: WHIPPITS, LAUGHING GAS, HIPPIE CRACK, CHARGERS.

> What is khat? 
Khat is a leafy green plant containing two main stimulant drugs which speed up your mind and body. Their main effects are similar to, but less powerful than, amphetamine (Speed).  Khat is used mostly in North East Africa, and the Arabian Peninsual and by expatriate communities from these regions

The key effects and risks of khat include:

People feel more alert, happy and talkative.
It suppresses the appetite. 
 
ACMD highlighted risk of significant liver toxicity from excessive use, noting reports of dependent users (though not physically addictive).It may cause disrupted sleep and make pre-existing mental health problems worse
 
It may cause disrupted sleep and make pre-existing mental health problems worse
Khat becomes a class C drug
 
On Tuesday 24 June 2014 khat became a controlled class C drug in the UK. This means that it is illegal to have khat for yourself and to sell or give away khat to someone else. If the Police catch you with khat, they’ll always take some action. This could be a police warning, a £60 penalty notice, or arrest and possible conviction.
 
Having khat for your own use (called possession) could result in being arrested and facing up to two years in prison and/or an unlimited fine. Selling khat or giving khat away for free, even to friends, (called supplying) could result in up to 14 years in jail and/or an unlimited fine.
 
Factsheets are available in Amharic, Arabic, English, Somali and Swahili for information on the reasons for the ban, penalties for use, and where to go for advice and support. They can be used by individuals and local, voluntary or other organisations including in health, prevention, social care and law enforcement. 
RELATED TERMS: QUAT, QAT, QAADKA, CHAT.

> What is PMA?
PMA is similar to MDMA (the chemical in ecstasy). It can make you feel alert, alive and full of energy. Its similarity means that PMA is actually sometimes sold as ecstasy. However, PMA is more poisonous and can kill at lower doses than MDMA. Also like MDMA, it can cause a fatal rise in body temperature.

The effects of PMA also take longer than MDMA to begin to be felt – so some users have overdosed by mistakenly taking pill after pill thinking nothing is happening, which can also be fatal.

 

In recent years there have been a number of deaths and hospitalisations that have been linked to PMA and/or PMMA. It appears that those affected thought they were taking ecstasy pills containing MDMA and did not know that the pills contained PMA and/or PMMA. As with any drug you can never be sure what it is your buying and how it might affect you.

 

As PMA is often sold as ecstasy pills rather than sold by its own name, a lot of the street names associated with PMA are actually street names for ecstasy pills. Sometimes PMA and/or PMMA containing pills even look like regular ecstasy pills.
RELATED TERMS: RED MITSUBISHI, PMMA, PINK MCDONALDS, PINK ECSTASY, MITSUBISHI TURBO, KILLER, DR DEATH, DOUBLE STACKED, CHICKEN YELLOW, CHICKEN FEVER.

> What is codeine? Codeine is an opiate drug  used to treat mild to moderate pain. It is available either from doctors as a prescription only medicine or, directly from a pharmacy combined in lower doses with aspirin, ibuprofen or paracetamol. It is used to treat pain that does not respond to simple painkillers.

Someone who takes the combination painkillers containing codeine at higher than recommended doses in order to get a stronger codeine effect, can easily consume doses of aspirin, ibuprofen or paracetamol that could be fatal.

The key effects and risks of codeine itself include:

Feelings of warmth and well-being, relaxation and sleepiness
Nausea, constipation, confusion, sweating, itching, mood swings and feelings of laziness.
RELATED TERMS: SYRUP, NUROFEN PLUS/MAX, COUGH SYRUP, CODIS500.

> What is methamphetamine?
Methamphetamine is part of the amphetamine family of stimulant drugs. Different amphetamines differ in how powerful they are and how they are considered under the Misuse of Drugs Act.

The key effects and risks of methamphetamine include:

Feeling very up, exhilarated, alert and awake.
 

 

Feeling agitated, paranoid, confused and aggressive.
 
There’s evidence that long-term methamphetamine use can cause brain damage, although this gradually gets better if the user stays off the drug for a long time.
The crystal form of methamphetamine, sometimes called Crystal Meth or Ice, is extremely powerful and addictive. Some compare it to ‘crack cocaine’ as both are smoked and give an intense, powerful ‘high’ followed by a very severe ‘comedown’, and both are very addictive.
RELATED TERMS: YABA, TINA AND CHRISTINE, METH, ICE, GLASS, CRYSTAL METH, CRANK.

> What is 2-DPMP?

2-DPMP is a powerful stimulant that has been found in the product ‘Ivory Wave’. It was taken as a ‘legal high’ and has amphetamine-like stimulant effects similar to speed. 2-DPMP effects can be both powerful and long-lasting, with effects that can last as long as 5-7 days - some users have had to go to hospital for help.

The related compounds D2PM and diphenylmethylpyrrolidine are also stimulants, with similar effects and risks to 2-DPMP.

The key effects and risks of 2-DPMP and related compounds include:

Feelings of euphoria, alertness, talkativeness and feelings of empathy.
Paranoia, hallucinations, severe agitation and muscle spasms.
Over-stimulation the heart and circulation.
Over-excitation of the nervous system – with risk of fits and dangerous overheating of the body.
On 13 June 2012, 2-DPMP, D2PM and diphenylmethylpyrrolidine were all made Class B drugs, which means they are now illegal to possess, give away or sell.
RELATED TERMS: VANILLA SKY, PURPLE WAVE, IVORY WAVE, DESOXYPIPRADROL, D2PM, 2-DIPHENYLMETHYLPYRROLIDINE.

> What is Etizolam?
Etizolam is used as medicine in Japan and India, to treat anxiety, insomnia and panic attacks, but it not licensed as a medicine in the UK. It can:

Slow the brain and body down and can cause sedation/sleepiness, relaxation and a feeling of calm.
It can help stop fits.

Similar drugs have been shown to cause short-term memory loss.  
They can be highly addictive.
The side effects of etizolam are sleepiness/drowsiness, decrease/shallow breathing, loss of coordination, which could become fatal, especially if you mix it with other drugs that slow down the nervous system, such as alcohol.
RELATED TERMS: ZOLY, SYLAZEPAM, PASADEN, MOZUN, INXITY, ETIZOLA, ETISEDAN, ETILAAM, ETICALM, DEZOLAM, DEPAS.

What is ketamine? 
It’s a powerful general anaesthetic which stops you feeling pain and it’s used for operations on humans and animals. The effects don’t last long, but until they wear off, ketamine can cause a loss of feeling in the body and paralysis of the muscles. It can also lead to you experiencing a distortion of reality.

Ketamine can:

Reduce sensations in the body, giving you a floating or detached feeling as if the mind and body have been separated, with some people feeling incapable of moving. This has been linked to having a near-death experience and is sometimes called "entering the k-hole".
Change how you see and hear things and can cause hallucinations. You can 'trip' for between half and hour to several hours, and after-effects may be felt for some hours afterwards.

Cause confusion, agitation, panic attacks, and impairment in short and long term memory. Frequent use is sometimes associated with the development of depression.

 
Cause very serious bladder problems in regular users. They can have problems peeing and when they do it can be very painful. Sometimes the damage is so bad that the bladder has to be removed by surgery. The urinary tract, from the kidneys down to the bladder, can also be badly affected.
RELATED TERMS: VITAMIN K, SUPER K, SPECIAL K, K, GREEN, DONKEY DUST.

> What is salvia? Salvia divinorum is a Mexican plant, with leaves that contain psychoactive chemicals that produce hallucinations when chewed or when dried and smoked.  Sold on the internet and in ‘headshops’ as ‘herbal ecstasy’, salvia is one of a number of substances marketed as ‘herbal highs’. 

Depending on dosage, experiences can vary from the fairly mild to full blown with psychedelic hallucinations.  At higher doses users can experience dramatic time distortion, vivid imagery and scary hallucinations.

RELATED TERMS: MEXICAN MAGIC MINT, HOLY SAGE, ECLIPSE.

> What is Naphyrone? Naphyrone is a stimulant drug closely related to the cathinone family which includes mephedrone. Naphyrone does not have a long history of use, so there is little evidence of its long term effects or on the risks from using it. However, due to its similarity to other cathinones, naphyrone is likely to share the same effects and risks. 

The high potency of naphyrone by comparison with other cathinones suggests that it is likely to be associated with a higher risk of accidental overdose.

The key effects and risks of naphyrone include:

Feelings of euphoria, alertness, talkativeness and empathy
Anxiety, paranoia and overstimulation of the heart and circulatory system
Over-excitation of the nervous system, which can cause fits.
RELATED TERMS: RAVE, NRG1, NRG-1, ENERGY1, ENERGY-1.

> What are opiate/opioid painkillers?

Opiate/opioid painkillers are medicines with effects similar to opium. They act by stimulating opioid receptors in the brain and nervous system. There are a large number of opiate/opioid medicines including codeine, morphine, dihydrocodeine, methadone, buprenorphine and diamorphine (also known as heroin).  Opium comes from the flower of the opium poppy and has been used for many hundreds of years to treat pain, sleeplessness and diarrhoea. Increasingly the terms opiate and opioid are used interchangeably when referring to these drugs. Opiate is sometimes used to refer only to those drugs derived directly or indirectly from natural opium. However, they all act on the opioid receptor in the body. 

Opiate painkillers are available either from doctors on prescription; or, in relatively low doses over-the-counter, at a pharmacy, combined with aspirin, ibuprofen or paracetamol. They are intended to be used for a limited period of time to treat pain that does not respond to standard effective painkillers like aspirin, ibuprofen and paracetamol.

Although opiate painkillers will vary in how powerful they are, they are all sedative painkillers that can depress the nervous system, and so slow down body functions and reduce physical and psychological pain. They can also be highly addictive. 

Although they are normally safe to take if you follow your doctor’s/pharmacists instructions, some people who have used opiate painkillers regularly become dependent on them. If they are taken primarily to get high and to feel better, the risk of addiction will be greater.

The key effects and risks of opiate painkillers include:

Pain relief.
Feelings of well-being, relaxation and sleepiness.
Constipation.
Suppressed coughing.
Nausea, vomiting, sweating, itching, mood swings and feelings of lethargy
Addiction.
In overdose, breathing stops. 
RELATED TERMS: MORPHINE, DIAMORPHINE.

> What is gabapentin?
Gabapentin is a prescription only medicine used to treat epilepsy and neuropathic pain (which is the result of damage to nerve tissue which can produce a burning, shooting or scalding feeling).

A prescription only medicine can only be prescribed following a consultation with a doctor.

Gabapentin can produce feelings of relaxation, calmness and euphoria and has been reported by some to cause stimulant effects. It can also enhance the euphoric effects of other drugs, like opiates, and is likely to increase the risks when taken in this way.
RELATED TERMS: NEURONTIN.

> What are GHB and GBL?

GHB (gammahydroxybutrate) and GBL (gammabutyrolactone), are closely related, dangerous drugs with similar sedative and anaesthetic effects. 

 GBL is converted to GHB shortly after entering the body. Both produce a feeling of euphoria and can reduce inhibitions and cause sleepiness. 

But both can kill  and are particularly dangerous when used with alcohol and other depressant or sedative substances.
RELATED TERMS: LIQUID ECSTASY, GEEBS, GBL, GBH, 4-BD, 1.

> What are poppers?

Poppers are usually found in the form of a liquid chemical sold in a small bottle. They are a group of chemicals called alkyl nitrites. Specific alkyl nitrites include butyl nitrite, isopropyl nitrite, isobutyl nitrite and amyl nitrite. They dilate the blood vessels and allow more blood to get to the heart.

The key effects of poppers can include:

A short, sharp head-rush like 'high'.
Enhanced sexual experiences.
Chemical burns with the development of a rash around the nose and mouth, and/or irritation of the nose and throat.
Feelings of sickness, faintness and weakness.
Death – if swallowed; or if used by individuals with heart problems.
RELATED TERMS: TNT, THRUST, ROCK HARD, RAM, LIQUID GOLD, KIX, AMYLS.

> What is pregabalin?
Pregabalin is a prescription only medicine used to treat epilepsy, neuropathic pain (which is the result of damage to nerve tissue which can produce a burning, shooting or scalding feeling) and anxiety.


A prescription only medicine can only be prescribed following a consultation with a doctor.

Pregabalin can produce feelings of relaxation, calmness and euphoria, like tranquilisers.

It can enhance the euphoric effects of other drugs, like opiates, and is likely to increase the risks when taken in this way.
RELATED TERMS: LYRICA.

What is methadone?

Methadone is a synthetic opiate manufactured for use as a painkiller and as substitute for heroin in the treatment of heroin addiction. It has similar effects to heroin but doesn't deliver the same degree of buzz or high as heroin.

Opiates are sedative drugs that depress the nervous system. They slow down body functioning and reduce physical and psychological pain.

A patient who is addicted to heroin will often be prescribed methadone to take instead of heroin and the dose of methadone is gradually reduced over time. This means that the patient can give up heroin avoiding acute withdrawal symptoms.

The key effects of methadone include:

Reducing physical and psychological pain.
Feelings of warmth, relaxation and detachment.
Overdoses that can lead to coma (and even death from respiratory failure i.e. when breathing stops).
RELATED TERMS: PHYSEPTONE, MIXTURE, LINCTUS.

> What is mescaline?
Mescaline is a psychedelic or hallucinogenic drug whose use leads to altered perceptions. It comes from button-shaped ‘seeds’ found in the Peyote cactus and also from some other members of the Cactaceae plant family and from Fabaceae bean family. Mescaline has been used for thousands of years and is best known as a drug used by some Native Americans in Mexico as part of their religious ceremonies.

Most users chew the button shaped ‘seeds’ to produce the hallucinogenic effects, which can last for between 12 - 18 hours.

The key effects and risks of mescaline include:

An altered state of consciousness – with altered thinking and changes in time perception –  often described as enjoyable and illuminating
Prominent changes in visual perceptions with intense visual distortions and possibly hallucinations (seeing things that aren’t really there)
Development of vomiting, headaches and feelings of anxiety
RELATED TERMS: PEYOTE BUTTONS, PEYOTE.

> What is methoxetamine?
Methoxetamine (also known as mexxy or MXE).  Although there is very little evidence about its short and long term effects, we do know that it is chemically related to ‘dissociative anaesthetics’ like ketamine and PCP, and has similar effects.  From anecdotal reports, MXE appears to be much stronger than ketamine, so users should take extra care to avoid overdosing by only using small amounts.

 

MXE is being marketed as a replacement for ketamine, but without ketamine’s harmful effect on the bladder. Ketamine causes very serious bladder problems with severe pain and difficulty passing urine, which can lead to surgical removal of the bladder. There is no evidence to support the suggestion that MXE is safer than ketamine in this regard. Ketamine’s harmful effect on the bladder has itself only been recently discovered after many years of its use and it is possible that over time MXE will turn out to be just as harmful to the bladder.

The main effects of MXE include:

•Feelings of euphoria, warmth, ‘enlightenment’ and being detached from the world around.

•Hallucinations – seeing and/or hearing things that aren’t there.

•Feeling restless and on edge, and some people feel like they have extra energy.

MXE is now a Class B drug

From 26th February 2013 MXE has become a Class B drug under the Misuse of Drugs Act.  This means that it is now illegal to have, sell or supply MXE, including giving it away to friends.
RELATED TERMS: ROFLCOPTR, RHINO KET, MXE, MOXY, MKET, MEXY, MEXXY.

> What is mescaline?
Mescaline is a psychedelic or hallucinogenic drug whose use leads to altered perceptions. It comes from button-shaped ‘seeds’ found in the Peyote cactus and also from some other members of the Cactaceae plant family and from Fabaceae bean family. Mescaline has been used for thousands of years and is best known as a drug used by some Native Americans in Mexico as part of their religious ceremonies.

Most users chew the button shaped ‘seeds’ to produce the hallucinogenic effects, which can last for between 12 - 18 hours.

The key effects and risks of mescaline include:

An altered state of consciousness – with altered thinking and changes in time perception –  often described as enjoyable and illuminating
Prominent changes in visual perceptions with intense visual distortions and possibly hallucinations (seeing things that aren’t really there)
Development of vomiting, headaches and feelings of anxiety
RELATED TERMS: PEYOTE BUTTONS, PEYOTE.

> What is pregabalin?
Pregabalin is a prescription only medicine used to treat epilepsy, neuropathic pain (which is the result of damage to nerve tissue which can produce a burning, shooting or scalding feeling) and anxiety.

A prescription only medicine can only be prescribed following a consultation with a doctor.

Pregabalin can produce feelings of relaxation, calmness and euphoria, like tranquilisers.

It can enhance the euphoric effects of other drugs, like opiates, and is likely to increase the risks when taken in this way.
RELATED TERMS: LYRICA.

> What is the 2C family of drugs? Drugs of the 2C family, such as 2CB, 2CT-7, 2CI and 2CE, have both psychedelic/hallucinogenic and stimulant effects. Their effects are a cross between ecstasy and LSD.  As hallucinogens or psychedelics they can make you see objects and reality in a distorted way and may cause hallucinations (seeing and hearing things that aren’t there). As stimulants they can make you feel awake and alert and may cause changes in your emotions.

These drugs are relatively new to the market and are not widely available in the UK.  Currently there's very little medical information about them.    

Key effects and risks of 2C drugs include:

An energy buzz with possible feelings of alertness, of being alive and of being in tune with surroundings –like ecstasy, particularly when taken at lower doses.
Headaches and nausea; and at high doses – more serious confused, agitated or even delirious states.
RELATED TERMS: TRIPSTACY, T-7, SEVENTH-HEAVEN, 7-UP, 2CT, 2CI, 2CE, 2CB

> Synthetic opioids are man-made drugs that mimic the effects of natural opioids (such as opium or heroin). Synthetic opioids, like all opioids, can reduce feelings of pain, can produce feelings of euphoria, relaxation and sleepiness and can be addictive.
They can also suppress and even stop breathing and have been linked to a number of deaths across Europe, including in the UK, and the rest of the world.

Some synthetic opioids have medical uses, fentanyl is sometimes used to treat pain associated with some cancer treatments, but others, like MT-45 and AH-7921, have no known medical or non-medical use.

Some synthetic opioids are more potent than natural opioids, such as morphine, and can be effective at very small doses, which can make it easier to take too much, to overdose and die.

> What are tryptamines?
Tryptamines are a family of drugs that share a similar chemical structure and can produce hallucinations. The most well-known tryptamine is probably LSD 

Different tryptamines can come in different forms, including white and coloured powders, different coloured capsules and pellets, as “tabs” or “blotters” (where a liquid tryptamine is soaked into a small piece of paper), as well as in liquid form. 

The experience of taking a tryptamine is sometimes called ‘taking a trip’. Trips can be good or bad, but until you take it you don’t know how it will affect you – and once it's started you can't stop it.

> What is tramadol? Tramadol, like other opiates, stimulates brain opioid receptors but it also increases brain serotonin levels. It is a medicine used to treat moderate to severe pain. It is only available with a prescription from your doctor. Other opiates include codeine, methadone and heroin.

Although tramadol is not as strong as heroin, it shares many of the same effects and both are addictive.

Tramadol can:

Produce feelings of warmth and well-being, relaxation and sleepiness.
 

Cause fatigue, drowsiness, loss of appetite, nausea and retching, diarrhoea, and dizziness or fainting.
Worsen side-effects and risks when used with certain antidepressants that tend to increase serotonin levels.
RELATED TERMS: ULTRAM, TRAMAL.

> What is are benzofuran compounds?

Benzofuran compounds are stimulants like ecstasy and amphetamines (such as speed) which can cause:
 
Temporary feelings of love and affection for other people.
Feelings of anxiety or even panic attacks.
Paranoid and confused states.
A rise in body temperature which could lead to overheating.
Overdose and death.
 
Benzofuran compounds, such as 6-APB, 5-APB, 5-APDB and 6-APDB are relatively new drugs, so not a lot is known about their long term effects. As they act like ecstasy and amphetamines it is likely that the risks associated with their misuse will also be similar.


Illegal from 10th June 2014

Because of their recognised harms , the Government followed expert advice and banned these drugs, and controlled them as class B drugs. This means that is is illegal to have, sell, supply or give away these substances to friends. 
 

If the Police arrest you in possession of benzofuran compounds, they’ll always take some action. This could include a formal caution, arrest and prosecution. Having benzofuran compounds for your own use (called possession) could result in up to five years in prison and/or an unlimited fine. While selling or giving benzofuran compounds away for free, even to friends, (called supplying) could result in up to fourteen years in prison.
RELATED TERMS: WHITE PEARL, BENZO FURY, 6-APDB, 6-APB, 5-APDB, 5-APB.

> What is 5-IT?
5-IT  appears to be a stimulant which means that it makes you feel more awake, chatty and ‘up’.  Other effects of stimulants include:

Feeling full of energy and not feeling tired
Feelings of agitation and disorientation.
5-IT is a relatively new drug, so we have very little information about its short and long term effects. As it appears to be a stimulant, it is reasonable to assume that its short and long term effects are also likely to be similar to speed. It may make you feel really happy and change the way you see the world.

Some batches of Benzo Fury have been found to contain 5-IT, while some 5-IT tablets have been sold as ecstasy even though they are 5-IT. As with any drug, you can never really be sure it contains what it says it does.

6-IT is a related substance of 5-IT.

5-IT and 6-IT banned from 10th June 2013
On 10th June 2013, 5-IT and 6-IT was banned by the Government under a temporary class drug order. It will remain illegal for at least 12 months while drug experts consider their full range of harms. It is therefore illegal to sell, supply or give away these substances to friends. If the police suspects that you have a ‘legal high’ which contains a temporary class drug, they can confiscate the substance and dispose of it. Supplying someone else, including your friends, can get you fourteen years in jail and/or an unlimited fine under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.
RELATED TERMS: 6-IT.

> 4,4’-DMAR is a synthetic stimulant, which means that it can make you feel very up, alert and energised, but can also make you feel agitated and aggressive, and is similar to Speed. There are no known medical uses for 4,4’-DMAR.

4,4’-DMAR has directly caused or been associated with a number of deaths in the UK and other European countries. User reports suggest that it can take up to an hour for the effects of 4,4’-DMAR to ‘kick-in’, which can lead to some people thinking that nothing is happening and taking more, or ‘re-dosing’, risking an overdose. 

> What is alcohol?

What we mean by alcohol here is alcoholic drinks, such as beer, wine and spirits. The scientific name for the alcohol in these drinks is ethanol or ethyl alcohol. Other chemical forms of alcohol, such as methanol and butanol, are much more toxic than ethanol and should not be consumed by humans. When FRANK talks about alcohol it is referring to ethanol.

Alcohol is a depressant, which means it slows down your body's responses in all kinds of ways. Just enough can make you feel sociable; too much and you’ll have a hangover the next day, and may not even remember what you got up to; and way too much alcohol in a single session could put you in a coma or even kill you.

Although it's legal for people aged 18 an dover ot buy and drink alcohol, that doesn't mean it's safe. 

The effects of alcohol can include:

Reduced feelings of anxiety and inhibitions, which can help you feel more sociable.
An exaggeration of whatever mood you're in when you start drinking.
A wide range of physical health problems, either as a result of binge drinking or from more regular drinking. The problems caused by alcohol include high blood pressure, stroke, liver disease, cancers and falls and other accidents.
Official guidelines:

The UK Chief Medical Officers advise that an alcohol-free childhood is the healthiest and best option. However, if young people drink alcohol:
 
• It should not be until at least the age of 15 years.
 
• If young people aged 15 to 17 years consume alcohol, it should always be with the guidance of a parent or carer or in a supervised environment.
 
• Parents and young people should be aware that drinking, even at 15 or older, can be hazardous to health and that not drinking is the healthiest option for young people.
• If 15 to 17 year olds do consume alcohol, they should do so infrequently and certainly on no more than one day a week. 

• Young people aged 15 to 17 years should never exceed recommended adult daily limits and, on days when they drink, consumption should usually be below these levels.
 
For adults, the UK Chief Medical Officers advise that there is also no completely safe level of drinking, but that by sticking within their recommended guidelines, people can lower the risks of harming their health. 
 
Adults are safest not to drink regularly more than 14 units per week, to keep health risks from drinking alcohol to a low level. And if they do drink as much as 14 units per week, it is best to spread this evenly over 3 days or more. If they want to cut down the amount they’re drinking, a good way to help achieve this is to have several drink-free days each week.
RELATED TERMS: BOOZE, BEVVY.