Am I an asshole? Bought a gun on Gunbroker.com because it was local, turns out it isn't. 
I can finally operate in an urban environment. CZ P-07.
5.56 and .50 Beowulf side by side
First Pistol
And we still have an active serial shooter in Phoenix. #endgunviolence #fucktheNRA
@NRA - we still remember your 26 Years worth of lies that guns are going to be confiscated #GunSense @212degreesnow
2Aers going for the idiocracy trifecta on @facebook today. You aren't takin' our guns! No Hillary & we're gonna riot!
want to trade sks with 500 rounds and 2 mags for dirt bike or anything fast.
Gun nuts believe in doomsday scenarios, war, buy guns and build bunkers. I don't want to live in your world. I'm going to walk in the sun.
Am I an asshole? Bought a gun on Gunbroker.com because it was local, turns out it isn't.
you trade with cash, or other goods in exchange for, firearms, or ANYTHING else.
my daughtet was killed by gun voilence. Maine can do more, keep guns from dangerous people
People with guns are scary.
Firearms are the great equalizer.
Rifles are weapons of mass destruction.
Many firearms owners say the media focuses too much on whether someone has a gun, and not enough on the people who use them improperly.
The newest edition to the Glock family has leaked and in turn, confirming some of the rumors about the G17M!
Anti-gun liberal professors are having a temper tantrum in Texas. Props to this university for standing firm – and following the law.
Duterte also said permits for firearms will only be issued under stringent conditions to prevent any civilian from building a personal armory.
@mewe Isn't rolling out the red carpet anymore gun guys.
Mewe is gun friendly so I'll be here more than fb anymore.
On mewe I started long island guns
First time shooting "long" distance 
I have a Marlin model 336w 30-30. Fun is in great mechanical condition it's probably had less than 100 bullets put through it. It has Simmons scope and a gun case. I am asking $350.
Great gun shoots fine.