I am going fo fuck your fucking pussy out bitch
fuck me deep motherfucker
Both sexes are worried about STIs.
He loves ?#?sex?. He doesn't care about people criticizing him for his highly active libido.
Ditch the regular... Try these places for ?#?sex?, the next time!
"Cheeky and funny sex is great. No need to regret it, because in the end you did just get laid."
I hope your morning wood is as good as your afternoon wood ;).
add me girls for sex chat or inbox me ;)
i'm so horny ryt now and wanna fuck u so hard babyy ;)
come add me or inbox me for sex chat and for full time fun and so kuch masti with me ;) i will fuck u so hard so that u will scream so hard and our sex will be so painful wooww yesss girlsss. :D let me fuck u alot ;)
add me girls muaahhhh <3
so nice ass fuckig by finger
Omg my pussy is poppin' and yellin'
might head to Cedar Point the week after Liberty Fest...whoever i invited better not pussy out on any rides...(especially u Brian...)
goddd! that bitch! i wish i could smack ur f8ckin pussy! NO HOMO! peace OUT!
I don't understand how humans became this disgusting. This bitch shouldn't even walk the earth. If i ever see something like this happening right in front of me, i would've hurt her so bad.
Bitch pissed me off early in the morning. What a good shit to start my day.
I must say, 7 am class really effin sucks. I am late bitch! ? ?
Bitch please! stop playing innocent.
go make me a sandwich bitch!
if you think bryt na kaayo kag math kay flat 1 ka permi--- then ./. para nimo! think twice bitch! :P
No bitch, I own you arsehole! xD
Respect is given to those who deserves it...for you??? Pffft...never will.
Live with your lies...karma is a bitch...it's coming.
hey bitch better not backstab anyone i love coz u know what will happen to u ^^ better not
such a mean person!!! that bitch!!!!
.....damn ass..... ......damn bitch.....
There is always going to be that one bitch you'll feel the urge to punch in the face every time you see her.
If youre girlfriend doesnt like that bitch, then dont talk to that bitch.
Bitch please, Facebook is a social network not a porn site. ??
I'm a bitch? HAHAHA Excuse me I am worse dan that!
`you ghurl!...`is acting like a WHORE BITCH.... :)) :P
Jealousy is a disease. Get well soon. Bitch.
WTF ?????? This is so Funny... Made my day ?????? SUCK THE COCK or SOCK THE COCK ?? Horny ?? Suck ?? Cock??




